Brothers and sisters, welcome to this update.
No doubt, we’re all still thinking
about the Memorial of Christ’s death
and the great love
that Jehovah and Jesus have shown.
And it was so good that many of us
were able to be together in person
for this most important occasion of the year.
Were you excited when you heard
that we would resume
in-person meetings worldwide
on April 1?
The Governing Body
really felt Jehovah’s direction
when making that decision,
and we were excited to share it.
Less than two hours after our meeting,
the Breaking News was posted.
Likely, you can identify with the feelings
of our brothers and sisters
in the following video.
Going back to the Kingdom Hall,
it’s wonderful seeing
the brothers and sisters,
hugging them; it’s emotional.
Clearly, Jehovah knows what we need.
I feel very excited.
I’m happy to be here,
hearing everybody’s comments.
Well, my stomach was in knots this morning,
but right now, I’m really excited
and happy that we’re all here.
For Jehovah’s people to get back
to worshipping together at meetings
—talk about a spiritual paradise.
Seeing one another face-to-face
(or, more accurately, “mask-to-mask”)
after so long was wonderful!
Singing together, praying together,
meeting new ones in person
—all of this is so refreshing.
One seven-year-old girl said:
“I have never been more patient in my life
than waiting to go back
to the Kingdom Hall for two years.”
Our return to the Kingdom Hall
has been possible
because in many ways
we’re in another phase of the pandemic.
Now that there is a high rate of vaccination
and new treatments are becoming available,
many governments have relaxed restrictions.
In various parts of the world,
life is somewhat returning to normal.
What does it mean?
We’re all learning to live with COVID-19
while still taking reasonable precautions.
In time, we look forward to being able
to resume additional theocratic activities.
Now, for the rest of our update,
we’re going to talk about
the situation in Ukraine and Russia.
How are our brothers and sisters
in those countries doing?
How can we cope with any anxiety
we may feel about the situation?
I’m sure we’ve all appreciated
the timely updates on jw.org.
Our brothers and sisters in Eastern Europe
have had a wonderful share in the ministry
despite war and the pandemic.
We are deeply touched
by their godly devotion.
The branch office in Ukraine is functioning
and actively assisting
tens of thousands of refugees.
The branch reports
that as of Monday, April 18,
over 42,000
of our brothers and sisters in Ukraine
have been displaced.
Close to 19,000
have chosen to flee to other countries.
We are deeply saddened to report
that 32 brothers and sisters have died.
How should we view this situation?
Recall Jesus’ words
when he described the sign of his presence,
as recorded at Matthew 24:6.
He said:
“You are going to hear
of wars and reports of wars.”
Some Bible scholars say that this means
wars that are nearby
and wars that are in distant places.
One translation says:
“You are going to hear
the noise of battles close by
and the news of battles far away.”
And that’s true today.
Some of us are hearing
the sounds of war nearby;
others are hearing of wars in distant lands.
These news reports
often involve graphic pictures of bloodshed.
At times, it seems like we’re right there
in the middle of the battle.
Additionally, we see and hear reports
of how our brothers are affected.
How do you feel?
Overwhelmed?
Shocked?
Angry?
Traumatized?
We feel the pain of our brothers and sisters.
At times, we may even ask:
‘Why does Jehovah allow this?’
It’s only natural to feel that way.
But we need to be careful.
What did Jesus say?
The rest of Matthew 24:6 says:
“See that you are not alarmed,
“for these things must take place,
but the end is not yet.”
‘Do not be alarmed’ or,
as another translation says:
“Take care not to be scared
out of your wits.”
And another says:
“Be sure that you don’t get upset.”
What will help us not to be alarmed?
Here are four points:
First, remember why Jehovah
permits our brothers to be affected by war.
Think of Job’s example.
At Job 1:10, Satan complained to Jehovah:
“Have you not put up a protective hedge
around him and his house
and everything he has?”
Satan claimed that Job
—and by extension all humans—
serve Jehovah only for selfish reasons.
Jehovah allowed Job to lose everything,
and yet Job kept his integrity
and proved Satan a liar!
The same is true today.
Some of our dear brothers and sisters
have lost everything
—their homes, their possessions,
their jobs, and even their loved ones—
as they have fled the conflict.
But as our brothers and sisters
remain loyal to Jehovah
despite war and other hardships,
they give a loud reply to Satan’s taunts
about Jehovah’s sovereignty.
Second, we need to be realistic
in our expectations.
Recall that in the first century,
Stephen and James were executed.
Jesus’ disciples fled Jerusalem
and lost their possessions.
These types of things
have already happened since 1914.
Some of us have been born in a generation
where we have not witnessed firsthand
the effects of war.
And yet many of our brothers and sisters
have had to live through wars
and civil unrest of all sorts.
And some in various places
are experiencing it now.
But how encouraging to consider
that so many have faithfully
and successfully endured
such challenging times!
Of course, the fact
that we see these events occurring
is evidence that Jehovah will soon intervene
and put an end to all these wicked things
we see in the world today.
As one brother said:
“The disciples weren’t asking
“because they wanted to know
when things would get really bad.
“They wanted to know when was the solution
and when was the fix going to come.”
Third, we remember
that this is an opportunity
to show our trust in Jehovah.
This reminds me
of an experience of a couple in Japan
who had lost everything in a flood.
They said:
“We thought that we trusted
in Jehovah before,
but now we really know what it means!”
And as one missionary commented:
“It’s not until your back is against the wall
that you see Jehovah’s hand.”
So we keep in mind
the words recorded
at Isaiah 30:15:
“Your strength will be
in keeping calm
and showing trust.”
Yes, we remain calm
and show our trust in Jehovah.
We have absolute confidence
that he knows our brothers’ needs
and will care for them.
As our 2022 yeartext,
Psalm 34:10, reminds us:
“Those seeking Jehovah
will lack nothing good.”
Perhaps we could illustrate this
with a caregiving situation.
When we are caring
for a loved one who is suffering,
it can be harder
than if we were the one suffering.
Why is that?
Because when we’re the one
suffering a problem
and we rely on Jehovah,
we experience the peace
that only he can provide.
But for the caregiver observing it,
it can be much harder.
The caregiver’s imagination can run wild
with all the problems
and worries and what-ifs.
Do we see the point?
When it comes to our brothers and sisters
who are affected
by the war in Eastern Europe,
we are much like a caregiver.
We’re concerned about them.
But that’s different
than actually being in the situation.
Jehovah gives his holy spirit
according to the actual need.
So we’re sure that Jehovah is providing
just what our brothers and sisters
in Eastern Europe need at this time.
When we remember this,
it can help us to cope with our anxiety.
What’s the fourth point that can help us?
We must remain neutral.
We realize that many news reports
may be propaganda
that is designed and slanted
to motivate listeners to take sides.
How do we respond
when we hear such reports?
We safeguard our hearts and minds,
realizing that all human governments
will soon be replaced by God’s Kingdom.
We know that no human efforts
can bring true peace
and security to the earth
—only God’s Kingdom can and will do so.
Therefore, our hearts and minds
are devoted to that Kingdom.
We’ve discussed four things
that can help us not to be terrified
by the events in Eastern Europe:
We remember why Jehovah
allows these things;
we keep realistic expectations;
we show our trust in Jehovah;
and we remain neutral.
What has helped
some of our brothers and sisters
to deal successfully with hearing
“of wars and reports of wars”?
Let’s watch the following video.
While reading the news
about the horrific effects of the bombings,
I felt cut to the heart.
Feelings of powerlessness
and helplessness overwhelmed me.
You feel overwhelmed
by all the news reports on the war,
and you pretty much get pulled
into everything that’s happening.
That definitely affects you
and your thinking,
and your neutrality
can really be put to the test.
My family lives in Ukraine,
so from the beginning of the war,
I was worried about their safety.
To keep up-to-date
with what was happening with them,
I tried to call them every day.
What I learned from them affected me a lot,
and it didn’t allow me to think calmly
about the situation.
I was moved by the stories of our brothers
who had to flee
their homes with their children
in order to save their lives.
I have found that reading the Bible
often works well for me.
I read it in the morning, during the day,
and before going to bed.
It removes negative images
and emotions from my mind
and, more important, it often allows me,
so to speak, to “hear” God’s voice
and regain my emotional balance.
I tried to reflect on how Jehovah
had protected his servants in the past.
I also imagined the times
described at Psalm 46:9,
which says that “[Jehovah] is bringing an end
to wars throughout the earth.”
This verse reinforces my belief
that soon Jehovah will destroy all weapons
and there will be peace in all the earth.
I try to pray about specific individuals.
It helps me to be more effective
in giving practical help.
I’ve made a real effort
to follow less news on the war.
What has really helped
is following the news releases
on our website,
jw.org,
about brothers and sisters
from different countries,
not just Ukraine and Russia.
Their example of neutrality and loyalty
has also helped me to keep my focus.
A lot of things convince me
that the only solution is God’s Kingdom
—first of all, the stark contrast
between Jehovah’s people
and the people who do not believe in him.
There’s no prejudice, no injustice.
We’re motivated by love for each other,
and it’s beautiful
to see that in every country.
We don’t get carried away
with our own different backgrounds.
It’s beautiful to see
that it’s possible even now.
I’m sure that Jehovah
by means of his Kingdom
wants and is able to undo all the harm
that results from human rule.
I’m convinced that only God’s Kingdom
can provide a lasting solution
to all problems.
I fully believe in what Jehovah says
because it’s always true.
Soon, when God’s Kingdom
rules over the whole earth,
then we’ll really enjoy peace.
Did you notice how they cope
with the trauma of news reports?
They focus on God’s Kingdom as the solution;
they limit the amount of news they consume;
meditate on how Jehovah
has helped his servants in the past;
pray frequently;
and focus on the time
when there will be no more war
but instead lasting peace.
No doubt, these same things will help us too.
Jehovah understands that we need
not only physical support
but also emotional support.
For example,
think about the latest Awake!  magazine,
entitled “A World in Turmoil
—How You Can Cope.”
It highlights
how you can protect your health,
livelihood, relationships, and your hope.
And for each of these topics,
it includes helpful tips.
That is “food at the proper time”!
In the midst of all this turmoil
in Eastern Europe,
it has been so encouraging
to hear of the generosity
of our brothers and sisters in nearby lands.
Tens of thousands
have offered accommodations
to those who are displaced.
Many are helping with relief efforts,
whether it is assisting those
who arrive at border crossings,
at relief centers,
or providing food and other basic items.
Because of their proximity to Ukraine,
our brothers in Hungary, Moldova, Poland,
Romania, Slovakia, and other lands
have been very busy
in coordinating relief efforts
in their branch territories.
And many are working hard
to help our refugee brothers and sisters
to get settled and back on their feet.
We continue to keep
all you dear brothers and sisters
in our prayers.
As we’ve discussed,
we do not need to be alarmed
by “wars and reports of wars.”
Rather, we have full confidence
that Jehovah will continue
to care for his precious sheep.
From the World Headquarters
of Jehovah’s Witnesses,
this is JW Broadcasting®.